Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Holly Rees caught the tail end of World War II, but Purple Hearts were still being earned even then.
It was after the Allied victory in Europe had been won, but well before the battle in the Pacific was finished.
June 21, 1945, that's when Sergeant Holly E. Rees, Company I of the 184th Infantry, was wounded in the foot during the brutal battle for Okinawa.
He had been on the ground just 32 days when he had to put down his rifle, but it was 32 days he'll never forget.
Holly Rees and his wife, Betty, live near the dividing line of Bryan and College Station, and today he is my guest on Veterans of the Valley.
Sergeant Rees, it's a pleasure to have you.
Let's talk sort of from the beginning right before your service started.
You grew up, raised, born in Prescott, Arizona, and it wasn't too long between graduation and when you were off to service, was it?
It actually started on January 21st, 1944, when I had my 18th birthday.
And since I had just started my final semester in high school, I applied for a deferment so that I could graduate with my class.
I was the class president and valedictorian, so I wanted to be sure and graduate with everybody else.
But we had graduation on a Friday night, the 3rd of June.
And Monday morning, June the 6th, before daylight, we were on the bus heading for Phoenix for pre-induction physicals.
That was June the 6th, 1944, which also happened to be D-Day.
D-Day.
So we fully expected that we would be going in any day, being called, but went all summer, never did get the call.
So a buddy and I, around September the 1st, went down to the draft board and said we were tired of waiting.
And so we volunteered.
And a couple of weeks later, we were in the Army.
And I know that for a while, you were pretty certain that you were going to be called to go to Europe to fight in the Battle of the Bulge.
But the timing was such that you never really went to Europe, right?
We were supposed to get 15 weeks of basic training.
And about the time we had 11 weeks of training is when the Battle of the Bulge occurred in Europe.
And they were taking the oldest class, which had 14 weeks of training, and flying them to Europe to throw them into the Battle of the Bulge.
And a few days later, they took the 13th week and the 12th week.
And the battle broke, and we didn't have to...
didn't get to go to Europe, so we were destined to go to the Pacific.
To go to the Pacific.
You probably would have preferred going to Europe the way that the war was fought.
Except I didn't enjoy the prospects of snow and ice in the Battle of the Bulge.
I've had veterans of the Battle of the Bulge, they say it's the coldest that they've ever been in their lives.
You had applied for OCS, Officer Candidate School, at Fort Benning, but your eyesight kind of let you down, so you didn't get to go that direction.
Instead, you went to Fort Ord and eventually to the Pacific, right?
Right.
Actually, we went from Fort Ord to Fort Lewis and shipped out from Seattle, and then we made a short stop on Oahu in the Hawaiian Islands, and then another stop on Saipan, and then made the final jaunt from Saipan to Okinawa.
Right, right.
You remember the 7th Amphibious Infantry Division, which on April Fool's Day they had
landed at Okinawa.
You came a little bit later than that.
I came in as a replacement.
Right.
Actually the battle had been going on for 50 days when I joined the fray.
And you were just 19 years old.
I mean, barely 19 years old at the time.
What were your thoughts from Prescott, Arizona, being in high school to just a few months later, you're about to fight a war.
In a few minutes, you're going to show a picture of the ships in the sea and being a landlocked Arizona.
And when I saw thousands of ships, that just blew me away.
As far as you could see in any direction, there was freighters and destroyers and battleships and aircraft carriers.
I think you told me that Okinawa was the second largest armada that was ever assembled, actually.
The D-Day in Europe was the largest and Okinawa was the second largest.
Now, as a replacement, you took a special kind of soldier, obviously, because you had to do your job on really a minimal amount of training.
Ten days training and you were in combat, right?
Well, a lot of them didn't even get that.
We were lucky that we were able to join the division in reserve and get to meet and get oriented with everybody.
But we had additional replacements that came under the front line, just walked up and handed a rifle and you're in business.
But we had the advantage of having 10 days with the division before we went into combat.
As a matter of a history lesson for the people who may not be aware, talk about Okinawa and why it was so important to the future plans of the war.
Okinawa was 350 miles south of Kyushu, the southernmost island of Japan.
and it was 67 miles long and two and a half to 18 miles wide and 640 square miles which is only 10 percent larger than Brazos County so it wasn't a big but it was ideally located
They planned to have at least a half a dozen airfields.
It had three major harbors, and that was to be the staging area for the assault on the Japanese mainland.
So that was very strategic in location and situation.
It was going to be the staging area, the supply center, the landing strips were going to be there.
This was going to be really the headquarters of where
the eventual ground assault on Japan was going to go from the ground assault that never happened because of the decision to drop the bomb.
Well, the plans were in November of 45 to land on Japan.
So if the war hadn't ended that summer, then that was the next.
So it ended up that Okinawa was the last battle of the World War II.
And it was the largest battle in the Pacific also.
You were heavy as a ground soldier with a rifle for 32 days and the largest ground battle actually in the Pacific.
Talk more about what you remember about those 32 days leading up to May the 21st when you were wounded.
Actually it was the only battle in the Pacific that involved an army.
the army participated but the technical term army consisted of seven divisions three marine divisions and four army divisions so we had approximately 105,000 ground troops
engaged on Okinawa.
And to me it was interesting that from when I went into combat in 32 days we moved 8 miles which averaged about a quarter of a mile a day for some days we didn't move at all but it averaged a quarter of a mile a day for 32 days.
Were you under constant resistance during these 32 days?
Were you, I mean, you were fighting a battle most every day?
Day and night.
Right.
The Japanese nearly always counterattacked at night.
So about that, we were ready to call it a night.
They were just getting geared up for a Banzai attacker.
And luckily we had destroyers offshore.
that had five inch naval flares and we could get on the radio and call for the lights and the Navy would lob these flares up in the air with little parachutes and they'd flutter down and just a steady stream of them they could light up the night almost as bright as day so when the Japanese were coming in under cover of darkness we could call JASCO and get the flares coming in and it helped our situation a whole bunch
Indeed, incredible.
May the 21st, 1945 was your first day in combat.
But on June the 21st, a month later, 1945 was the day that you were wounded.
Talk about that and how that came to be.
One of the things that a lot of people don't understand
is that when we approached the Japanese, our objective was to kill them, shoot for the head, the body, and they were better off eliminated.
But the Japanese had a policy
That if we weren't in an imminent threat just right on top of them, that if a sniper by choice, that they would shoot us to wound us.
So many of our wounded were shot in the foot like me or in the leg or something.
And the theory was that if you were dead, they shoved you aside and went on.
But if you were wounded, they had to have a medic to take care of you.
take you back to a hospital and have doctors and nurses and medications and eventually hospitals and rehabilitation.
So strategically we were much more of a liability as a casualty than we would have been as a fatality.
Right, right.
It involved more people.
I was always very grateful for that policy.
You bought into it quite.
I bought into that.
Indeed.
So you were wounded on June 21st, 32 days.
And ironically, that was also, you say, the day that Okinawa was declared secure.
They declared it secure.
Wasn't so secure.
We decided it wasn't quite secure.
Wasn't secure enough for Sergeant Rees, right?
After that, you sort of went to a series of hospitals there in Okinawa, then to Guam, and eventually
What was your path back to the United States?
Well, first it was a naval hospital on Guam, which was an interesting experience.
We had Navy beans for breakfast every morning in the Navy hospital.
And then we flew back to Oahu again, and I spent a couple of weeks at the Army hospital on Oahu, and then ended up in Modesto, California for two months at Hammond General Hospital in Modesto.
Again, I go back to the fact that you were 19 years old.
You really took the fast track to war, from high school to war.
Were you scared?
Constantly.
Anybody that didn't combat says they aren't scared, either crazy or lying.
Right.
Indeed.
We've got some photographs that we're going to show you.
A vast amount of photographs that you have that we've chosen a few of them from your war time and pretty fascinating that I want to go ahead and go to and we're going to put them up on the screen.
And there you are, about quite a handsome soldier there.
How old were you when that was taken?
I was still 18 when that was taken.
That was during basic training.
18 years old, fresh out of high school and on your way.
Green as a gourd.
Now, this is you and your brother.
Your brother's on the left.
Talk about him.
He was in the Navy Air Corps on the aircraft carrier Princeton.
And I always thought it was an irony that he survived the sinking of the Princeton.
Yes.
In the Leyte Gulf, right?
In the Leyte Gulf.
Yes.
And then later died in a car wreck in Arizona.
And what was his name?
Gilbert.
We use this just because of the irony.
I think people that have been reading the news just heard last week that Western Union has stopped sending telegrams after so many years.
So we wanted to put this up.
Talk about this Western Union telegram, who it was to.
That was the telegram that was sent to my mother telling her that I'd been wounded.
I think people can read that.
It says, Secretary Ward desires me to express his deep regret that your son, private
Holly Rees, was slightly wounded on Okinawa 21st June 1945, continued to address mail to him, etc.
So obviously that's the kind of telegram that no mother wants to get, but obviously preferable to the other kind that a lot of people were getting.
Ironically, I had already called her on the telephone and she knew all about it before the telegram.
So the youngsters out there that don't know what we mean by Western Union telegrams, that is...
Actual Western Union telegram.
There it is.
Let's go on.
This is taken from a book that you gave to me.
This sort of gives an idea of what the landing at Okinawa looked like.
You can see looking off in the distance the vast number of ships, and this was just a fraction of what there actually were.
It's quite muddy, wasn't it?
We had lots of rain during the spring in Okinawa.
which made the tanks and artillery a problem.
We're going to talk later on in the show about Holly Rees, the bicycle rider.
And this is some of your early beginnings of it.
Talk about where was this taken?
You're the third one in line there from the front.
Where was this taken?
It was in Breckenridge Park in San Antonio, Texas.
Is that right?
Okay.
So this was after you had finished and you were assigned at Fort Sam Houston.
Right.
I know Breckenridge Park very, very well.
As a matter of fact, I played golf there.
This is just fascinating.
I'm going to let you go ahead and tell the story.
We're going to leave that up on the screen.
And this is a flag, obviously, and I want you to take it from there.
What are we looking at?
Each individual Japanese soldier had their own personal flag.
And I've never had this translated, but it's my understanding.
that the inscriptions around there are sort of a service record that tells where they were and what they did and so forth.
And they carried these in their helmet on top of their head to keep them dry and clean.
And this particular one I shot in the head and the holes in there, if I'd have known you had that good a flag, I'd have aimed a little bit lower and not spoiled the flag.
But this is one of my most prized
So the writing around the outside, we think it's just sort of their itinerary or sort of where they served, where they were and where they served that they wrote on their flag.
And this particular enemy holding this, keeping it in his helmet so that it would stay dry and thus the two bullet holes in the middle.
there's some more holes farther around the perimeter too.
Right, and there are some blood stains on it also that it's hard to see in that picture.
Maybe even a few brines.
Right, I wanted to go ahead and put that picture up, but also show you that we have it right here in the studio, as a matter of fact.
Made out of silk.
Made out of silk, again, so that it would stay safe from the elements.
But I've got to tell you,
Sergeant Rees, I've had a lot of artifacts on this show, but I think this is probably the most amazing World War II artifact I've ever held in my hand.
Just absolutely amazing.
It's something that I know
Brings back some memories, doesn't it?
Sure it does.
Indeed it was.
While we're looking here at this camera of Sergeant Rees and I, as a matter of fact, let's go ahead and look at some of the other things that Sergeant Rees has brought.
This is a hand grenade, right?
That's a genuine hand grenade.
And you said that people really don't take the pin out with their teeth.
That's just something that John Wayne does, right?
It takes a pretty good pull on that ring.
Yeah, because you'd be taking some teeth away.
We'll go ahead and stay on that shot, and I'll just put this right up next to the...
to the grenade there.
What are we looking at there?
That's a 50 caliber bullet.
And the reason that that has significance to me is that we've all heard of friendly fire.
Right.
Unfriendly fire is when it's the enemy.
Friendly fire is when you're shooting yourselves.
Right.
And we had called on the Marine Air Corps for
strafing mission and the pilot hit his trigger just a little bit too soon and we were strafed with 50 caliber bullets
And they killed the artillery spotter that was as close to me as you are.
He took two of those, just almost cut him in two.
Right.
Incredible.
This, any military man knows what this is.
This is, I accidentally just called it a shovel.
It's an entrenching tool though, right?
That's the second most important thing we carried.
A rifle was number one and that was number two.
You put it this way to chop down.
As a pick.
And then as a shovel, you just put it straight out like that.
And this was yours, right?
This is the one that you... It's certainly in good shape.
Certainly in good condition.
That's not the one I had on Okinawa.
Not the one.
No, no.
Now you've got two...
Talk about what we're looking at here.
You got two.
This is a Japanese bayonet.
Bayonet.
And this is a United States World War I. Wait, let me hold that.
So right here.
Bayonet.
Okay.
This is Japanese.
Tell me how you came by this.
The guy that had it didn't need it anymore, so I borrowed it.
The only major difference is the Japanese put a hook on theirs, and our bayonets were 10 inch.
This is a 16 that they used to use, and then they decided that a shorter bayonet was more effective.
And the World War I bayonet, how did you come by that?
I can't remember where I got that.
Right.
I want to...
Excuse me, I want to hold up one more thing here.
I'll hold it up for this same camera so we can look.
This is a shadow box of your awards.
And I'll just hold it right here so the camera can get in on it.
And...
I've got some wonderful awards there.
I've got a list here, as a matter of fact.
They will talk.
Sergeant Rees was awarded, of course, the Purple Heart.
You can see the Purple Heart there on the second from the left.
Also, the Bronze Star Medal.
I guess that's on the far left, right?
Yes.
And then the Purple Heart.
Then next to that, the Good Conduct Medal.
The Asiatic Pacific Theater Medal.
I'm sort of moving from left to right here, I believe.
The American Theater Medal.
the World War II victory medal and the sharpshooter's medal with the suspended bars for rifle, carbine, machine gun, and pistol.
Also, the patches, I guess, down below the 7th Infantry Division,
That's the hourglass division, right?
That was the patch of your seventh edition that you have on your uniform now.
We're going to mention that in a minute, that you still fit in this uniform very good.
The 24th Army Corps patch is the second one from the left.
The 10th Army is the other hourglass-looking patch.
And then Pacific Ocean areas, the blue patch.
Those are quite handsome.
And then up top, I guess those are insignias.
the regiment crest of the 184th and the distinguished unit citation, the combat infantry badge that's in the middle, the identification tag and the crossed rifles.
That's an ornament I guess you wore on your collar, right?
On the far right.
So I know you're very, very proud of these.
Yes.
Indeed.
After you, we'll go ahead and put that back in there.
Oh, and your dog tags.
There's the dog tags.
Don't forget the dog tags.
Those never left you, right?
We carry those around our neck.
The actual dog tag was plain metal, but they rattled, so we put the rubber around it to keep them quiet.
And another interesting thing I didn't tell you the other day is there's a can opener.
Oh, right here in the middle.
That didn't look like much of a can opener, but when you're hungry... But it would do the trick.
When you're hungry, it was a great can opener, right?
That opened the can opener.
Yes.
You were wounded.
You recovered.
As a matter of... They almost wanted to...
amputate the front part of your foot but if you had not been awake they might have done that and you you protested that right they asked me to sign a release and i wouldn't do it so they they left and turned out that was the best thing to do right i want to sort of fast forward you moved on to uh fort sam houston you uh you finished your service and then uh back as a civilian again you uh you met betty betty was from mississippi
And you were from Arizona.
You didn't want to go to Mississippi.
She didn't want to go to Arizona.
So you all settled in Dallas, right?
That's right.
And then while we were living in Dallas, I went to work for the Social Security Administration.
They sent us first to Tyler, then to Longview, then to San Angelo, then to Austin.
And finally, we ended up in Bryan in May of 1957.
Been here ever since.
That's right.
I think you said you worked for Firestone initially when you went to Dallas, but then got with the Social Security Administration.
And you were in charge of the Bryan office for quite a while until you retired in 1984.
I was district manager here for 27 years until I retired in 1984.
You still fit in that uniform.
I don't think there's a whole lot of folks that can say that they still fit in their World War II uniform, but I know you're proud of that part, too.
It's always interesting to me that nobody ever mentions Bronze Star, Purple Heart.
All I'm concerned about is I can still wear them.
Well, I'm glad I was able to mention all of those things.
But it's amazing that it even exists after 60 years.
This is the uniform that I was discharged in 1946.
Sergeant Rees, we've got about three minutes left, and I want to spend that three minutes talking about a whole different aspect of your life, and that is 25 years ago you were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes.
You didn't want to get the insulin shots, so you told your doctor that you were going to replace the shots with diet and exercise.
You've been strict on that diet for 25 years, and you are a bike rider.
Tell them what happened this past January the 4th.
Because I was shot in the foot, I couldn't run and jog, but I could sit down and ride a bike.
So on January the 4th, I finished 50,000 miles over the last 25 years.
I've averaged 2,000 miles a year for 25 years.
As a matter of fact, I ride right by the front of the KAMU studios about four or five days a week.
That's right.
It's about a 12-mile route, right, from your home, which is just not far off the campus, off of university, that you ride on the campus, you ride through campus.
out towards the George Bush library and then back to research park and back home.
It's about a 12 mile route.
And you do this pretty religiously four to five times a week.
It takes about 52 minutes to make the 12 mile run.
Now I know that we were talking the other day and you said that if they gave purple hearts for bike riding, you'd earned a whole, a few more purple hearts than just the one that you've got.
Then in 50,000 miles, I can't imagine that you hadn't hit the ground a couple of times.
Well, number one, I'm on my fifth bicycle.
I usually get about 12,000, 13,000 miles to a bike before I wear them out.
And I've had numerous accidents.
You haven't broken a bone, though.
You've left some skin on the highway, though.
Never had a stitch.
And you're still riding the bike four to five days a week, about 12 miles at a go.
Absolutely tremendous.
Talk about your family.
We've talked about your wife, Betty, but I know that you have kids and grandkids and great grandkids, right?
I have a son in Florida who's both a bachelor and a master's from A&M, and our oldest daughter lives in Albuquerque, and our youngest daughter lives in Alexandria, Louisiana.
And between the three of them, they have our five grandchildren, four grandsons and one granddaughter.
And our oldest grandson has two children.
So we have two great granddaughters that live in Dallas.
So we're quite proud of our family.
They're our greatest blessing.
Indeed they are.
And I know you're also very active in the Rotary here in town.
and very active, and you look great, and you're in your uniform, and I want to thank you very much for your service and telling us your story today.
We're proud to have you in the Brazos Valley.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you, Sergeant Holly Rees.
As you can see, that bullet to the foot 61 years ago did not stop Holly Rees then, and some 80 birthday celebrations haven't slowed in much either.
He's well into the equivalent of yet another bike ride around the world, and I'm betting that he'll be around to celebrate that too.
We salute Sergeant Holly Rees for his service, and we thank all veterans.
And thank you to our underwriter, First National Bank.
And be sure to read more stories of veterans in the Brazos Valley Heroes each Sunday in the Eagle.
For Sergeant Holly Rees, I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.